---
layout: post
title:  "Lebesgue integration for simple functions."
categories: jekyll update
---
<script src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/mathjax/2.7.0/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML" type="text/javascript"></script>

In this brief note and the next, we take a bottom-up approach to defining the Lebesgue integral on an arbitrary measure space.

## Definition

Let the triple $$(X,\mathfrak{M},\mu)$$ denote this measure space: $$X$$ is the underlying set, $$\mathfrak{M}$$ is the $$\sigma$$-algebra of measurable subsets, and $$\mu$$ is a (positive) measure on $$(X,\mathfrak{M})$$.
The atoms of integration on $$X$$ are the characteristic functions associated to the measurable subsets.
In the context of a finite measure with total measure $$\mu(X) = 1$$, these integrals admit interpretation as probabilities of events.
Declare

$$ \int \chi_{E} = \mu(E) $$

for any measurable $$E \in \mathfrak{M}$$. Linearity of $$\int$$ forces the relation

$$ \int \sum_{j = 1}^{m} a_{j}\chi_{E_{j}} = \sum_{j = 1}^{m} a_{j} \mu(E_{j}) $$

for any finite collection $$E_{1},\dots,E_{m}$$ in $$\mathfrak{M}$$ and coefficients $$a_{1},\dots,a_{m}$$ in the nonnegative extended real numbers.
Such linear combinations are called _simple functions_.
Alternatively, simple functions are those functions to $$[0,\infty]$$ that assume but finitely many values.
N.B., We adopt the convention $$\infty \cdot 0 = 0$$.

Here, we must contend with the fact that the canonical map from the free $$\mathbb{R}$$-vector space generated by $$\mathfrak{M}$$ to the $$\mathbb{R}$$-vector space of functions on $$X$$ is not monic; the kernel is generated by pre-existing algebraic structure on $$\mathfrak{M}$$.

For instance, we can take $$X$$ to be the outcome space of a flip of a fair coin.

$$ X = \{H,T\}. $$

The constant function $$1$$, i.e., the indicator of the sure event, admits the following two representations.

$$ 1 = \chi_{X} = \chi_{\{H\}} + \chi_{\{T\}}. $$

Note the equivalence of these two representations ultimately arises from the relation

$$ X = \{H\} \cup \{T\} $$

on $$\mathfrak{M}$$. We thereby witness that it is the additivity of the measure $$\mu$$ that ensures $$\int$$ is well-defined.

## Proof

Consider

$$ f = \sum_{j = 1}^{m} a_{j}\chi_{E_{j}}. $$

We reduce to the case when the $$E_{j}$$ partition the space $$X$$ as follows. For $$\epsilon \in \{0,1\}^{m}$$, declare

$$ E(\epsilon) = \bigcap_{j = 1}^{m} \begin{cases} E_{j} & \text{if $\epsilon_{j} = 1$,} \\ E_{j}^{c} & \text{if $\epsilon_{j} = 0$.} \end{cases} $$

The $$E(\epsilon)$$ partition $$X$$. Further, on each $$E(\epsilon)$$, the function $$f$$ is constant and assumes the value $$\sum_{j = 1}^{m} a_{j}\epsilon_{j}$$.
Hence,

$$ \sum_{j = 1}^{m} a_{j}\chi_{E_{j}} = \sum_{\epsilon \in \{0,1\}^{n}} \left( \sum_{j = 1}^{m} a_{j}\epsilon_{j} \right) \chi_{E(\epsilon)}. $$

Likewise,

$$ \sum_{j = 1}^{m} a_{j} \mu(E_{j}) = \sum_{j = 1}^{m} a_{j} \sum_{\epsilon \in \{0,1\}^{m}, \epsilon_{j} = 1} \mu(E(\epsilon)) = \sum_{\epsilon \in \{0,1\}^{m}} \left( \sum_{j = 1}^{m} a_{j}\epsilon_{j} \right) \mu(E(\epsilon)). $$

In sum, it suffices to show that any representation of $$f$$ by a partition of $$X$$ yields the same integral.

Assume

$$ f = \sum_{j = 1}^{m} a_{j}\chi_{E_{j}} = \sum_{k = 1}^{n} b_{j}\chi_{F_{j}}, $$

where $$(E_{j})_{j = 1}^{m}$$ and $$(F_{k})_{k = 1}^{n}$$ are both partitions of $$X$$.

$$ \sum_{j = 1}^{m} a_{j}\mu(E_{j}) = \sum_{j = 1}^{m} a_{j} \sum_{k = 1}^{n} \mu(E_{j} \cap F_{k}) $$

$$ = \sum_{j = 1}^{m} \sum_{k = 1}^{n} a_{j} \mu(E_{j} \cap F_{k}) $$

$$ = \sum_{j = 1}^{m} \sum_{k = 1}^{n} b_{k} \mu(E_{j} \cap F_{k}) $$

$$ = \sum_{k = 1}^{n} b_{k} \sum_{j = 1}^{m} \mu(E_{j} \cap F_{k}) $$

$$ = \sum_{k = 1}^{n} b_{k} \mu(F_{k}). $$

That is, the value of the integral is independent of the choice of partition. 
$$\tag*{$\blacksquare$}$$

## Remarks

- The main idea underpinning the argument is the fact that the measure of a set can be computed via any partition.
- Folland defines the integral of a simple function in terms of its standard representation, i.e.,
$$ f = \sum_{a \in \mathbb{R}} a \chi_{f^{-1}(a)}. $$
The preceding argument demonstrates that, in fact, any representation of a simple function by finitely many characteristic functions will yield the same result.
- The result is equivalent to the additivity (2.13b) of Folland's integral.
